Roadmap (#4)
val-lang/val-lang.github.io: pages/implementation-status.md

---
layout: default
---

Val's implementation is at a very early stage.
Key components of the compiler are still to be implemented before a first version of the language can be used.
Further, some aspects of the language design are still immature and will likely require more iterations.

This page gives an overview of our roadmap going forward and provides details on our main milestones.

> ![2022 roadmap](./implementation-status.png)

Reviewer: This diagram doesn't look quite right to me.  Two-way interop is not in the picture, and it gives the impression that the specification is not being developed in parallel with the rest of the language.  Given that most projects never get around to a spec, that might look like a promise we're unlikely to fulfill.

Reviewer: If there was a caption saying this is the **2022 Roadmap** that would help a lot.

### Implement one-way interoperability with C++

Interoperability with C++ is one of the main goals of the Val project.
Despite their similarities, however, both languages have considerably different type systems, introducing important challenges.
Further, we do not expect the two languages to share the same ABI, meaning that seamless operability at the source level will likely require fairly sophisticated adapters under the hood.

To tackle these issues, we plan on implementing interoperability in two phases.
The first, which we expect to deliver by the end of the year, will only allow Val code to be used from C++.
We'll achieve that objective by generating C-like low-level APIs for all public Val symbols using LLVM together with C++ types and functions to wrap these APIs.

The second phase, on which we will work next year, will support seamless two-way interoperability by interfacing Val compiler with [clang](https://clang.llvm.org).

### Implement a standard library

Once we will have delivered the experimental compiler, A good part of Q4 will be dedicated to the implementation of a standard library for the language.

> We will calibrate the base of our design on [Swift's standard library](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swift/swift-standard-library), for two reasons:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will base our design on [Swift's standard library](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swift/swift-standard-library), for two reasons:
```

### Investigate implementation strategies for concurrency

Once we will have finalized the design of Val's concurrency model, we will be able to investigate the optimal implementation strategies.

We are leaning toward a [stackful coroutines](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1462166.1462167), mostly to avoid monadic asynchronous programming (a.k.a. [polychromatic functions](https://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/2015/02/01/what-color-is-your-function/)), where asynchronous operations can only be called from asynchronous contexts.
Nonetheless, discussions with experts have revealed that such a strategy may induce unfortunate runtime costs and that stackless coroutines may not necessarily force a monadic asynchronous style upon the language.

One solution might be to adopt a sackful model as a default strategy and surface stack information in the type system to let the compiler opt for stackless code generation whenever possible.

We on plan having adopted and implemented a strategy by the end of Q3.

### Implement two-way interoperability with C++

The objective of the second phase of C++ interoperability is to support seamless interaction of Val and C++ code in the same project.

> To that end, we will interface with clang to let Val compiler understand C++ and generate appropriate wrappers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To that end, we will interface with clang to let Val compiler understand C++ and generate any necessary glue code.
```

“wrapper” is a bit of a hot-button word, since Herb has said that a wrapper approach to interop doesn't work.

The main challenge will be to map C++ types to Val, as the former supports features that have no obvious equivalent in the latter (e.g., throwing destructors).
We also expect our investigation and implementation to raise a plethora of new open questions.
As such, we do not plan on delivering interoperability before Q4.

### Design and implement missing language features

Some of the features on our wishlist are out of scope for 2022, as we believe they are not essential to assess the validity of the language's design.
2023 will allow us to revisit these features with a working experimental implementation.

Notable features in our wishlist include:
- exception handling;
- polymorphic effects;
- variadic generic value and type parameters; and
- resumable functions (a.k.a. [generators](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generator_(computer_programming))).

> ### Develop an inclusive community

Reviewer: This deserves more prominence, and maybe a place on the timeline, especially if we decide to try to compete with Carbon.  They've put a lot of attention on that, or at least talked about it a lot, and they've included lots of people.
